11/9: How GenAI Can Change Marketing and Advertising

Image generated by DALL-E 3

There’s a long list of industries that will be impacted by AI and Generative AI in particular. From AI-generated music to LLM protein structure prediction in healthcare. However, IMO most industries are slow to adopt the tech despite the sizeable upside. I’m not going to get into the reasons for this lag but do want to quickly double click into the ‘sizeable upside’. Regardless of industry, the role of GenAI can be partitioned into 2 broad buckets: (1) efficient and (2) incremental. Efficiency is about doing more with less while incremental is just about doing more. An example of efficiency would be a ma and pop pizza shop that can better operate their CRM with natural language, so to quickly and easily stand up email campaigns, where before they would need an operations or marketing person to support. An example of incremental would be adding a customer support chatbot to a retail clothing website that can assist with the often complicated return process. Efficient solutions will often be operational and internal while incremental solutions will often be productized and external/consumer facing. Its helpful to have this mental model since, as we will discuss later, most early adopters are thinking strictly in terms of incrementality.

Marketing and advertising are often cited as a breeding ground for GenAI use cases; however, as someone who currently works in media for one of the biggest advertisers in the world, the industry is a member of the incremental-only group. GenAI use cases go as far as creative concepting with tools like DALL-E and MidJourney. This is a relatively spicy diagnosis because marketing actually has a history of reasonable AI usage. Regression models are used for marketing mix models, NLP for social listening and Real-time Action Algorithms for programmatic ad buying. But AI is not as technically prohibitive as it once was. Sure, there will always be specialty use cases that require high levels of expertise, but LLMs specifically are ushering in the age of AI democratization.

I wanted to layout a list of use cases for democratized AI in marketing and advertising where I still see significant white space for organizations to either spin up their own tools or adopt existing tools.



Notice the Ease of Integration. Mostly Moderate and Easy. And integration and implementation are only becoming easier with time as foundation model developers are focusing more on usability as a second phase after instantiating a powerful standalone model. What this list doesn’t explicitly mention are Marketing agnostic Use Cases, the most obvious being general productivity. So much of a marketer’s role is collaboration and communication and GenAI is perfectly suited for this project management-esque work.

Ultimately, smaller marketing orgs will be the first to experiment with this technology and larger orgs will lag due to the sheer size and bureaucracy. For large orgs, I vouch for a small team solely dedicated to AI implementation to pressure test what works well and what doesn’t.